Filesystem hierarchy

the root directory contains directories that each holds specific type of information, they do follow a decent structure but there are ocasion where they dont for different reasons()

Filesystem types, there are several, but also there is an abstraction layer between applcations and the different types of filestytem, the abstraction layer allows those 2 parts to communicate, it works as a translator for the different types os filesytem.

Journaling - makes sure the system keeps track of whatever we are movinng or copying files (specially larger ones), its handy in case of sudden interruptions like a power shortage. Journaling usually comes by default on most systems

important command: df

df T - checks files systems in the machine.

Anatomy of a Disk
Every disk is partioned in "parts", thats usefull for separation like; we can use different files system for each partition.

Partition Table -> every disk need a partition table, it is where all the info about the partitions are, size, type, type: GPT and MBR are the most well know types.

Partition -> Partitions are used to help us organize our data;

Filesystem structure -> its basically formed of a database that points to where the actual data is, every file or directory has an entry into this database (which is called Inode and we will dive depeer into it later.)

Disk Partitioning -> hand on partioning, I couldnt do it cause I was in the cloud and I had no USB storage to work with.

5. creating a filesystem -> we need a filesystem for every partition
sudo mkfs -t ext4 /dev/sdb2

6. mount and unmount -> after we create a filesystem for the partition we must mount the filesystem into a directory in the system.
sudo mount -t ext4 /dev/sdb2 /mydrive

7. /etc/fcstab -> we add our filesystem to fcstab uin order to have it automatically mounted on boot.

8. swap -> a swap partition is used for emergency memory, whwnever the system needs more memory it will take it frmo the iddle processes within the swap partition.

9. disk usage -> commands to check and observe
du to check diskusage
df to check for the free space in disks

10. Filesystem repair - usually the system checks automatically our filesystem on boot before mounting it, but our filesystem can be so damaged (by a some sort of incorrect shutdown) that we will need to do some aiding ourselves, run the command fsck /dev/sda to check for the filesystems health.

11. Inodes

Inodes (Index node) is the entry in the partition table, it keeps al information about a file, except file name and the file itself;
Inodes are given numbers sequentially when created (sometimes an inode will have a smmaler number because it took the place of a terminated inode)
Inodes have about 15 pointers that determine where the actual data is in the system(including nested ones which point to other ones)

12. symlinks - are files that point to another files, just like shortcuts
there are 2 types of links soft (symlink) and hardlinks
symlinks are capable of pointing to files across filsystems because they are named based instead of uniquely numbered like all other types of inodes.



